# ======================================================================
#
# Copyright (C) 2000-2004 Paul Kulchenko (paulclinger@yahoo.com)
#
# SOAP::Lite is free software; you can redistribute it
# and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.
#
# $Id: Client.pod 354 2010-03-18 18:29:09Z kutterma $
#
# ======================================================================

=pod

=head1 NAME

SOAP::Client - exists purely as a superclass for client classes declared by the various SOAP::Lite transport modules.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The SOAP::Client class exists purely as a superclass for client classes
declared by the various SOAP::Lite transport modules. The methods it
provides are all simple accessors; they return the current value when
called with no arguments or set the attribute value and return the object
reference when called with an argument. These attributes include:

=head1 METHODS

=over

=item code, message, status

Stores the response code, message, and status from the most-recent send attempt. For some protocols, such as FTP, the same value is used for all three because of the lack of finer-grained detail (the default is to ensure that all three attributes contain data, even if redundant). Other protocols (such as HTTP) have distinct values in each.

=item endpoint

Identifies the current endpoint to which messages are being sent. This should match the value of the transport method from the L<SOAP::Transport> class, but setting this doesn't propagate to the transport object. It is better to use the transport object (or the shortcut via the SOAP::Lite object itself) when setting this.

=item is_success

The success or failure of the most-recent transmission is noted here as a boolean value.

=item options

The options attribute keeps a hash-table reference of additional  options and their values. At present, only one option is used by any of the transport modules:

=over 

=item compress_threshold

The value of this option should be a numerical value. If set, and if the Compress::Zlib library is available, messages whose size in bytes exceeds this value will be compressed before sending. Both ends of the conversation must have it enabled.

=back

Other options may be defined using this mechanism. Note that setting the options using this accessor requires a full hash reference be passed. To set just one or a few values, consider retrieving the current reference value and using it to set the key(s).

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<SOAP::Server> 

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Special thanks to O'Reilly publishing which has graciously allowed SOAP::Lite to republish and redistribute large excerpts from I<Programming Web Services with Perl>, mainly the SOAP::Lite reference found in Appendix B.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2000-2004 Paul Kulchenko. All rights reserved.

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself.

=head1 AUTHORS

Paul Kulchenko (paulclinger@yahoo.com)

Randy J. Ray (rjray@blackperl.com)

Byrne Reese (byrne@majordojo.com)

=cut
