# ======================================================================
#
# Copyright (C) 2000-2004 Paul Kulchenko (paulclinger@yahoo.com)
# SOAP::Lite is free software; you can redistribute it
# and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.
#
# $Id: Deserializer.pod 372 2010-04-29 18:32:31Z kutterma $
#
# ======================================================================

=pod

=head1 NAME

SOAP::Deserializer - the means by which the toolkit manages the conversion of XML into an object manageable by a developer

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SOAP::Deserializer provides the means by which incoming XML is decoded into a Perl data structure.

=head1 METHODS

=over

=item context

This provides access to the calling context of C<SOAP::Deserializer>. In a client side context the often means a reference to an instance of SOAP::Lite. In a server side context this means a reference to a SOAP::Server instance.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 DESERIALIZING RAW XML INTO A SOAP::SOM OBJECT

A useful utility for SOAP::Deserializer is for parsing raw XML documents or fragments into a SOAP::SOM object. SOAP::Lite developers use this technique to write unit tests for the SOAP::Lite module itself. It is a lot more efficient for testing aspects of the toolkit than generating client calls over the network. This is a perfect way for developers to write unit tests for their custom data types for example.

Here is an example of how raw XML content can be parsed into a SOAP::SOM object by using SOAP::Deserializer:

    $xml = <<END_XML;
    <foo>
      <person>
        <foo>123</foo>
        <foo>456</foo>
      </person>
      <person>
        <foo>789</foo>
        <foo>012</foo>
      </person>
    </foo>
    END_XML

    my $som = SOAP::Deserializer->deserialize($xml);

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2000-2004 Paul Kulchenko. All rights reserved.

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself.

=head1 AUTHORS

Byrne Reese (byrne@majordojo.com)

=cut
